there are people who have claimed that
dreams are mere merely the consequence
of random neuronal firing which is a
theory I think is absolutely absurd
because there's nothing random about
dreams you know they're very very
structured and and very very complex and
they're not like snow on a television
screen or or static on a radio like
those things are complicated and and
then also I've seen so often that people
have very coherent dreams that have a
perfect narrative structure now they're
fully developed in some sense and so
that just doesn't I that theory just
doesn't go anywhere with me I just can't
see that as useful at all
and so so I'm more likely to take the
phenomena seriously and say well there's
something to dreams well you dream of
the future and then you try to make it
into a reality that seems to be an
important thing you know or maybe you
dream up a nightmare and try to make
that into a reality because people do
that too if they're hellbent on Revenge
for example and full of hatred and
resentment I mean that manifests itself
in terrible fantasies you know those
dreams then people go act them out these
things are powerful know and whole
Nations can get caught up in Collective
dreams that's what happened to the Nazis
that's what happened to Nazi Germany in
the 1930s it was absolutely remarkable
amazing horrific destructive spectacle
and the same thing happened in the
Soviet Union the same thing happened in
China it's like we have to take these
things seriously you know and try to
understand what's going
on so Yung believed that the dream could
contain more information information
then was yet articulated you think
artists do the same thing you know like
people go to museums and they look at
paintings Renaissance paintings or
modern paintings and they don't exactly
know why they're there you know I I was
in this room in in New York I don't
remember which museum but it was a room
full of Renaissance art you know great
painters the greatest painters and
thought maybe that room was worth a
billion dollars or something outrageous
because there was like 20 paintings in
there you know so priceless and the
first thing is well why are those
paintings worth so much and why is there
a museum in the biggest city in the
world devoted to them and why do people
from all over the world come and look at
them what the hell are those people
doing one of them was of the Assumption
of Mary you know beautifully painted
absolutely glowing work of art and
there's like 20 people standing in front
of it looking at it and you think what
are those people up to you know they
don't know why did they make a
pilgrimage to New York to come and look
at that painting it's not like they know
why is it worth so much I mean I know
there's a status element to it too but
that begs the question why do those
items become such high status items what
is it about them that's so absolutely
remarkable well we're strange
creatures so I was trying to figure out
in part well where did the information
that's in the dream come from because it
has to come from somewhere and you could
think about it as a revelation you know
because it's it's like it Springs out of
the void and it's new knowledge and it's
a revelation you didn't produce it it
just it just appears
but that's see one of the things I want
to do with this series is like I'm
scientifically minded and I'm quite a
rational person and I like to have an
explanation for things that's rational
and empirical before I look for any
other kind of explanation and I don't
want to say that everything that's
associated with divinity can be reduced
in some manner to biology or to an
evolutionary history or anything like
that but in so far as it's possible to
do that reduction I'm going to do that
and I'm going to leave the other
phenomena floating in the air because
they can't be pinned down and and in
that category I would put the category
of mystical or religious experience
which we don't understand at
all
so artists observe one another they
observe people and they represent what
they see and they transmit the message
of what they see to us and they teach us
to see and we don't necessarily know
what it is that we're learning from them
but we're learning something or at least
we're acting like we're learning
something we go to movies we watch
stories
we we we we immerse ourselves in fiction
constantly that's an artistic production
and for many people the world of the
Arts is a living world and that's
particularly true if you're a creative
person and it's the creative artistic
people that do move the knowledge of
humanity forward and they do that with
their artistic Productions first they're
on the edge and the dancers do that and
The Poets do that and the visual artists
do that and the musicians do that and
we're not sure what they're doing like
we're not sure what musicians are doing
what the hell are they doing why do you
like music you know it gives you deep
ination of the significance of things
and no one questions it you go to a
concert you're thrilled it's a quasi
religious experience particularly if the
people really get themselves together
and get the crowd moving you know
there's something incredibly intense
about it but makes no sense whatsoever
it's it's not an easy thing to
understand music is deeply patterned and
I and and patterned in layers and I
think that has something to do with it
because reality is patterned and deeply
patterned in layers and so I think music
is representing reality in some
fundamental way and that we get into the
sway of that and sort of participate in
being and that's part of what makes it
such an uplifting experience but we
don't really know that's what we're
doing we just go do it and and and and
it's nourishing for people right I mean
young people in
particular lots of them live for music
it's where they derive all their meaning
their cultural identity everything
that's nourishing comes from their
affiliation with their music and as part
of their cultural identity so that's an
amazing
thing the question Still Remains where
does the information in dreams come from
and I think what it the where it comes
from is that we watch the patterns that
everyone acts out we we've watched that
forever and we've got some
representations of those patterns that's
part of our cultural history that's
what's embedded in stories in fictional
accounts of of the story between good
and evil the bad guy and the good guy
and the romance you know these are these
are canonical patterns of being for
people and and they deeply affect us
because they represent what it is that
we will act out in the world and then we
flesh that out with the individual
information we have about ourselves and
other people and so it's like there's a
there's a there's waves of of behavioral
patterns that manifest themselves in the
crowd across time the great dramas are
played on the crowd AC cross time and
the artists watch that and and they get
intimations of what that is and they
write it down and they tell us and then
we're a little clearer about what we're
up to now like a great dramatist like
Shakespeare let's say we know that what
he wrote is fiction and then we say well
fiction isn't true but then you think
well wait a minute maybe it's true like
numbers are true you know numbers are an
abstraction from the underlying reality
but no one in their right mind would
really think numbers aren't true you can
even make a case that the number numbers
are more real than the things that they
represent right because the abstraction
is so insanely powerful once you have
mathematics You're Just Deadly you can
move the world with mathematics and so
it's not obvious that the abstraction is
less real than the than the than than
the more concrete reality and you take a
work of fiction like Hamlet and you
think well is that it's it's not true
because it's fiction but then you think
wait a minute what kind of explanation
is that like maybe it's more true than
non-fiction because it takes what the
story that needs to be told about you
and the story that needs to be told
about you and you and you and you and
abstracts that out and says look here's
something that's a key part of the human
experience as such right so it's it's an
abstraction from this underlying noisy
substrate and and people are affected by
it because they see that the thing
that's represented is part of the
pattern of their being that's the right
way to think about it and then with
these old stories these ancient stories
it seems to me like that process has
been occurring for thousands of years
it's like we watched ourselves and we
extracted out some stories we imitated
each other and we represented that in
drama and then we distilled the drama
and we got a representation of the
distillation and then we did it again
and at the end of that process that took
God only knows how long like I think
some of these
stories they they've traced fairy tales
back 10,000 years some fairy tales in
relatively unchanged form and it
certainly seems to me that the
archaeological evidence for example
suggests that the really old stories
that that that the Bible begins with are
at least that old and likely embedded in
a prehistory that's far older than that
you might think well how can you be so
sure and the answer to that in part is
that cultures that don't change like the
ancient cultures right they didn't
change as fast as they stay the same
that's the answer so they they keep
their information moving generation to
generation that's how they stay the same
and so we know again in the
archaeological record there are records
of rituals that have remained relatively
unbroken for up to 20,000 years it was
discovered in caves in Japan that were
set up for a particular kind of bear
worship that was also characteristic of
Western Europe so these things can last
for very long periods of
time we're watching each other act in
the world and then the question is well
how long have we beening watching each
other and the answer to that in some
sense is well as long as there's been
creatures with nervous systems and
that's a long time you know that's some
hundreds of millions of years perhaps
longer than that we've been watching
each other trying to figure out what
we're up to across that entire span of
time and some of that knowledge is built
right into our bodies which is why we
can dance with each other for example
right because understanding isn't just
something that you that you have as an
abstraction it's something that you act
out you know that's what children are
doing when they're learning to Rough and
Tumble play is they're learning to
integrate their body with the body of
someone else in a harmonious way
learning to cooperate and compete and
that's all instantiated right into their
body it's not abstract knowledge they
don't know that they're doing that
they're just doing it and so we can even
use our body as a representational
platform so we've been studying each
other for a long time abstracting out
what is it that we're up to and that's
that that's what is it we're up to what
should we be up to that's even a more
fundamental question if you're going to
live in the world and you're going to do
it properly what does properly mean and
how is it that you might go about that
well it's the right question right it's
what everyone wants to know how do you
live in the world not what is the world
made of it's not the same question how
do you live in the world it's the
Eternal question of human beings and I
guess we're the only species that has
ever really asked that question because
all the other animals they just go and
do whatever they do not us it's a
question for us
[Music]